Update Git documentation (#284)
postech-dao/simperby: docs/git.md

You should have a basic understanding of

1. Blockchain
2. [Simperby Governance and Consensus](./protocol_overview.md)
3. Git

## Summary

1. **Every finalized and to-be-finalized data in a Simperby chain are stored in Git repositories.**
2. All the finalized data, including transactions, agendas, agenda proofs, chats, and blocks, are committed linearly to the `finalized` branch.

> 3. All the to-be-finalized data, including pending agendas (waiting for approval) and blocks (waiting for finalization) will be presented as multiple branches grown from the `finalized` branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. All the to-be-finalized data, including pending agendas (waiting for approval) and blocks (waiting for finalization) are presented as multiple branches grown from the `finalized` branch.
```
Use present tense.

4. Each Simperby node manages its own Git repository and provides a read-only Git server to peers and the node operator.

> 5. The node operator can fetch (literally `git fetch`)  the local server (that the Simperby node manages) to their own local clone, **walk through the history, and check the snapshots and diffs using whatever Git client they want**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. The node operator can `git fetch` the local server that the Simperby node manages to their own local clone, **walk through the history, and check the snapshots and diffs using whatever Git client**.
```
Suggest removing the parentheses.

6. **Peers** can also **fetch blockchain data from each other, verify commits, and synchronize** the blockchain state or pending proposals.

> 7. The node operator may create their own transactions as commits and push them to a designated branch (`work`) to create **a proposal to rebase on the `finalized` branch**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. The node operator may create their own transactions as commits and push them to the `work` branch to create **a proposal to rebase on the `finalized` branch**.
```

Author: The very particular branch name `work` is not the point here. I think it's important to note that there exists 'a designated branch'.

Reviewer: okay

> 8. **Simperby functions as a general distributed Git repository**, that can contain any useful data for the organization. This is trivially achieved because **Simperby takes Git commits as transactions.**

Reviewer: How about moving the sentense#8 to the top of the list or merging it with the sentense#1?

Author: I think 8 is the conclusion throughout 1 to 7.

Reviewer: Then why don't you present it as a separate one-line conclusion?

### Correspondence

> The following holds for correspondence:

Reviewer: Suggest transforming it to be clearer: "Correspondense between blockchain ops and Git."

Author: I tried many expressions including yours but nothing sounds 'precise' to me.
To be super precise, it could be
"the following hold for correspondence from blockchain operations to Simperby's unique use of Git operations"
or so.
but it's not worth having to complicated explanation followed by easy-to-understand analogies right after it.

Reviewer: ok then

1. Transactions and block headers: commits
2. The canonical history of the blockchain: the `finalized` branch
3. A block proposal is finalized: rebased on the `finalized` branch
4. State snapshot: work tree of the repository
5. Start a new node: clone the repository
6. Peer-to-peer networking: fetch the repository from each other

## Why Git?

Git is a distributed version control system that is widely used in the software development community. It is a mature technology that has been used for decades.
There are four main reasons why we use Git as the underlying storage of Simperby.

### Version Control System

Git is a version control system, first of all.

> It provides wonderful feature like branching, merging, rebasing, and diffing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It provides wonderful features like branching, merging, rebasing, and diffing.
```

You can checkout to any commit and browse the file system at that point in time.
It manages the entire history of the repository in a linear or DAG structure.

This fits amazingly well with Simperby, because.. TODO

### File System

Git manages a file system that can be directly browsed by the users via the host operating system. As Simperby is a blockchain for an organization, not a contract platform, the role of the blockchain state is to serve as a general-purpose data storage. Here are a few examples of the use of a distributed file system for an organization:

1. Replacement of a shared file system like [Google Drive](https://www.google.com/drive/)

> 2. Storage for a static fils server for the website that the organization owns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Storage for a static file server for the website that the organization owns.
```

3. Codebase of the organization - also the most common use case of Git itself
4. Diff-sensitive data like the law or the constitution of the organization (articles of association, bylaws, etc.)

If you want to explore the snapshot of the blockchain state (including the past ones), you can simply checkout to the revision and browse the file system.

### Distributed

Git inherently works in a distributed manner.

> A Git repository may have multiple 'remotes' that can be freely added, removed and fetched from. There is no 'central server' for the repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Git repository may have multiple 'remotes' that can be freely added, removed, and fetched from. There is no 'central server' for the repository.
```

> Based on this principle, in Simperby, each node will add the peers that they discovered, and may fetch relevant remote branches, verify them and update their local repository. It could advance its block height by verifying the incoming block headers, or add block or agenda proposals to the repository provided by the peer's remote tracking branches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on this principle, in Simperby, each node will add the peers that it discovers. Then it may fetch relevant remote branches, verify them, and update its local repository. The node could advance its block height by verifying the incoming block headers. Also, it could add block or agenda proposals to the repository provided by the peer's remote tracking branches.
```

Reviewer: BTW, I don't clearly understand what you mean by "the repository provided by the peer's remote tracking branches" at the end of the sentense. (and I suspect others might not either)

Author: I updated the paragraph.

Reviewer: Alright

### Powerful Third-Party Tools and Services

Git is the most used version control system currently.
It has a huge ecosystem of third-party tools and services.

> 1. Hosting services like [GitHub](https://github.com) or [GitLab](https://gitlab.com) can easily **mirror** the repository of the organization. This is useful for the organization that wants to provide their data to the public. It will save the cost of developing its own block explorer and indexing service! It is also possible to add a CI plugin to verify the incoming commits as Simperby node does.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Hosting services like [GitHub](https://github.com) or [GitLab](https://gitlab.com) can easily **mirror** the repository of the organization. This is useful for an organization that wants to provide their data to the public. It will save the cost of developing its own block explorer and indexing service! It is also possible to add a CI plugin to verify the incoming commits as Simperby node does.
```

You should have a basic understanding of

1. Blockchain
2. [Simperby Governance and Consensus](./protocol_overview.md)
3. Git

## Summary

1. **Every finalized data in a Simperby chain is stored in a Git repository.**
2. It includes transactions, agendas, agenda proofs, chats, and blocks, linearly committed in the `finalized` branch.
3. **Every to-be-finalized data is also managed in a Git repository.**

> 4. All the pending agendas (waiting for approval) and pending blocks (waiting for finalization) will be presented as multiple branches grown from the `finalized` branch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. All the pending agendas (waiting for approval) and pending blocks (waiting for finalization) will be presented as multiple branches, grown from the `finalized` branch.
```

> 4. All the pending agendas (waiting for approval) and pending blocks (waiting for finalization) will be presented as multiple branches grown from the `finalized` branch.

Reviewer 2: 1. **Every finalized and to-be-finalized data in a Simperby chain are stored in Git repositories.**
2. All the finalized data, including transactions, agendas, agenda proofs, chats, and blocks, are committed linearly to the `finalized` branch.
3. All the to-be-finalized data, including pending agendas and blocks, are presented as multiple branches grown from the `finalized` branch.

Author: fixed

> 5. A Simperby node manages its own Git repository and provides a read-only Git server to the peers and the node operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. A Simperby node manages its Git repository and provides a read-only Git server to the peers and the node operator.
```

Reviewer 2: Also, is the node operator different from a Simperby node?

> 5. A Simperby node manages its own Git repository and provides a read-only Git server to the peers and the node operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Each Simperby node manages its own Git repository and provides a read-only Git server to peers and the node operator.
```

> 6. The node operator can fetch (literally `git fetch`)  the local server (that the Simperby node manages) to their own local clone, **walk through the history, and check the snapshots and diffs using whatever Git client they want**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. The node operator can fetch (literally `git fetch`)  the remote server (that the Simperby node manages) to their local clone, **walk through the history, and check the snapshots and diffs using the Git client**.
```

> 6. The node operator can fetch (literally `git fetch`)  the local server (that the Simperby node manages) to their own local clone, **walk through the history, and check the snapshots and diffs using whatever Git client they want**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. The node operator can fetch the remote server to their own local clone and use a Git client to **walk through the history and check snapshots and diffs**.
```

Author: You changed the meaning. It is local server.

Reviewer: Then why don't you present it as a separate one-line conclusion?

Reviewer 2: understood.

> 7. Network participants (the **peers**) can also **fetch the blockchain data from each other and verify the commits, and synchronize** the blockchain state or pending proposals.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. **Peers** can also **fetch blockchain data from each other, verify commits, and synchronize** the blockchain state or pending proposals.
```

> 8. The node operator may create their own transaction as a commit and push to a designated branch (`work`) to create **their own proposal to rebase on the `finalized` branch**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. The node operator can create their own transactions as commits and push them to a designated branch (`work`) to create **a proposal to rebase on the `finalized` branch**.
```

Reviewer 3: or I think 
-> may create each of their own transaction as a commit

Author: fixed

Author: fixed

> 9. **Simperby functions as a general distributed Git repository**, that may contain any useful data for the organization. This is trivially achieved because **we take Git commits as transactions.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
9. **Simperby functions as a general distributed Git repository**, that may contain any useful data for the organization. This is trivially achieved because **Simperby takes Git commits as transactions.**
```

> 9. **Simperby functions as a general distributed Git repository**, that may contain any useful data for the organization. This is trivially achieved because **we take Git commits as transactions.**

Reviewer 2: or 
```suggestion
9. **Simperby functions as a general distributed Git repository** that can contain any useful data for the organization, as Git commits are treated as transactions.
```

Author: may->can fixed.
I think it's important to emphasize the consequence of the commit-transaction model. Let's keep that expression.

### Correspondence

> In short, the following correspondence holds:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following correspondence holds:
```

1. Transactions and block headers: commits

> 2. Canonical history of the blockchain: the `finalized` branch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The canonical history of the blockchain: the `finalized` branch
```

> 3. Block proposal is finalized: rebased on the `finalized` branch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. A block proposal is finalized: rebased on the `finalized` branch
```

4. State snapshot: work tree of the repository
5. Start a new node: clone the repository
6. Peer-to-peer networking: fetch the repository from each other

## Why Git?

Git is a distributed version control system that is widely used in the software development community. It is a mature technology that has been used for decades.
There are four main reasons why we use Git as the underlying storage of Simperby.

### Version Control System

Git is a version control system, first of all.
It provides wonderful feature likes branching, merging, rebasing, and diffing.
You can checkout to any commit and browse the file system at that point in time.
It manages the entire history of the repository in a linear or DAG structure.

This fits amazingly well with Simperby, because.. TODO

### File System

Git manages a file system that can be directly browsed by the users via the host operating system. As Simperby is a blockchain for an organization, not a contract platform, the role of the blockchain state is to serve as a general-purpose data storage. Here are few examples of the use of a distributed file sytem for an organization:

> 1. replacement of a shared file system like [Google Drive](https://www.google.com/drive/)

Author: fixed

> 2. storage for a static fils server for the website that the organization owns.

Author: fixed

> 3. codebase of the organization - also the most common use case of Git itself

Author: fixed

### Commit Format

TODO

### Branches

These are the names of the branches that are specially treated by the Simperby node. Branches other than `work` and `p` are managed by the node; it will be rejected if pushed.

1. `finalized`: always points to the last finalized block. It is strongly protected; users can't push to this branch.
2. `work`: the only branch that users can freely push or force-push. CLI commands like `create` interact with this.
3. `p`: the block proposal for this node. The node operator may push or force-push to this branch. When pushed, the Git server will check the validity of the branch. The consensus engine will recognize this branch and propose to the consensus. It stands for 'block proposal'.
4. `a-<hash>`: a valid agenda (but not yet approved) propagated from other nodes. If the governance has approved the agenda, it will point to the `agenda-proof` commit which lies on top of the agenda commit. The `<hash>` MUST be the hash of the commit, truncated in the first 8 digits.
5. `b-<hash>`: a valid (but not yet finalized) block propagated from other nodes. The `<hash>` MUST be the hash of the commit, truncated in the first 8 digits.

> 6. `fp`: a very special branch that always holds the finalization proof for the last block. This is required because a block header doesn't contain the finalization proof of itself. Thus, to make a repository self-verifiable, it is essential to have the proof somewhere, in some way. This branch has only one empty commit that is directly on top of the corresponding block commit, titled with `finalization proof of the last block`. The commit message body contains the actual proof. **Note that the commit of `fp` branch could differ between nodes due to the different observations of the signers**, but the proof itself must be valid.

Author: fixed

> 6. `fp`: a very special branch that always holds the finalization proof for the last block. This is required because a block header doesn't contain the finalization proof of itself. Thus, to make a repository self-verifiable, it is essential to have the proof somewhere, in some way. This branch has only one empty commit that is directly on top of the corresponding block commit, titled with `finalization proof of the last block`. The commit message body contains the actual proof. **Note that the commit of `fp` branch could differ between nodes (due to the different observations of the signers)**, but the proof itself must be valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. `fp`: a very special branch that always holds the finalization proof for the last block. This is required because a block header doesn't contain the finalization proof of itself. Thus, to make a repository self-verifiable, it is essential to have the proof somewhere, in some way. This branch has only one empty commit that is directly on top of the corresponding block commit, titled with `finalization proof of the last block`. The commit message body contains the actual proof. **Note that the commit of `fp` branch could differ between nodes due to the different observations of the signers**, but the proof itself must be valid.
```
The parentheses are unnecessary.
